Travel, Meal and Hospitality
Expenses Directive
Management Board of Cabinet
Issued: November 2004
Last Amended: January 1, 2020
Corporate Policy and Accountability Branch
Planning and Performance Division
Treasury Board Secretariat 
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 2/38
Table of Contents
1.0 PURPOSE................................................................................................................. 4
1.1 Application and Scope.................................................................................... 4
2.0 PRINCIPLES AND BEST PRACTICES.................................................................... 5
2.1 Principles........................................................................................................ 5
2.2 Best Practices................................................................................................. 5
3.0 REQUIREMENTS – GENERAL................................................................................ 5
4.0 ACCOUNTABILITY FRAMEWORK ......................................................................... 6
4.1 Managerial Discretion..................................................................................... 7
4.2 Public Disclosure of Expenses ....................................................................... 7
5.0 TRAVEL.................................................................................................................... 8
5.1 When Travel is a Regular Part of the Job....................................................... 8
5.2 When Travel Occurs Occasionally.................................................................. 8
5.3 Approvals for Travel ....................................................................................... 9
5.4 Delegation of Authority for Travel Approvals ................................................ 11
5.5 Before Travelling .......................................................................................... 11
5.6 Transportation – How to Get There .............................................................. 15
5.7 Accommodation............................................................................................ 19
6.0 MEALS .................................................................................................................. 21
6.1 Reimbursable Meals..................................................................................... 21
6.2 Centrally Purchased Meals (Catered)........................................................... 22
6.3 Meal Rates in Canada .................................................................................. 23
6.4 Meal Rates Outside of Canada..................................................................... 23
7.0 HOSPITALITY......................................................................................................... 24
7.1 Planned Hospitality Events ........................................................................... 25
7.2 Hospitality that Includes Alcohol ................................................................... 25
7.3 Special Status for Service of Alcohol at Planned Hospitality Events ............ 25
7.4 Gift-Giving..................................................................................................... 26
7.5 Documentation for Hospitality Reimbursement and Payment....................... 26
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 3/38
8.0 EXPENSES FOR CONSULTANTS AND OTHER CONTRACTORS ..................... 27
9.0 RESPONSIBILITIES............................................................................................... 27
10.0 DEFINITIONS........................................................................................................ 30
11.0 APPENDICES....................................................................................................... 32
11.1 Appendix A: Requesting Special Status for International Travel and/or
Service of Alcohol at Hospitality Events .................................................... 32
11.2 Appendix B: Summary of Approval Authority.............................................. 34
11.3 Appendix C: Revisions to the Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses
Directive .................................................................................................... 37
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 4/38
1.0 PURPOSE
The purpose of this Directive is:
• to set out rules and principles for the reimbursement and payment of travel, meal
and hospitality expenses to ensure fair and reasonable practices;
• to provide a framework of accountability to guide the effective oversight of public
resources for travel, meal and hospitality expenses; and
• to set the parameters for the public disclosure of information about expenses.
1.1 Application and Scope
This Directive sets out the rules for managing travel, meal and hospitality expenses for
employees and appointees in:
• ministries;
• provincial agencies; and
• the Independent Electricity System Operator and Ontario Power Generation Inc.
(“organizations”)
The Directive also applies to consultants and contractors to ministries or provincial
agencies/organizations.
The following definitions apply for the purpose of this Directive:
• Each of the above form part of what is considered government.
• Claimant refers to any person making a claim under the terms of this Directive.
• Approver refers to the person with the authority to make approvals under this
Directive.
• Chief Executive Officer (CEO) refers to the head of operations at provincial
agencies/organizations.
• Chair refers to the person appointed as the head of a provincial
agency/organization and who is accountable to the minister, regardless of
whether the title “chair” is used.
• OPS employees refers to employees of ministries or of provincial agencies that
are Commission public bodies (i.e., employees appointed under section 32 of the
Public Service of Ontario Act, 2006 (PSOA)).
This Directive replaces the Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive dated
January 1, 2017.
In the event of a conflict or inconsistency, this Directive prevails over a memorandum of
understanding (MOU) between a minister and the head of a provincial
agency/organization, particularly where the MOU contains less stringent requirements.
This Directive does not prevail over legislation or a collective agreement.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 5/38
2.0 PRINCIPLES AND BEST PRACTICES
2.1 Principles
• Travel is approved only after other communications options are considered.
• Taxpayer dollars are used prudently and responsibly with a focus on
accountability and transparency.
• Expenses for travel, meals and hospitality support government objectives.
• Plans for travel, meals, accommodation and hospitality are necessary and
economical with due regard for health and safety.
• Legitimate authorized expenses incurred during the course of government
business are reimbursed.
2.2 Best Practices
• Prior approval to incur expenses is obtained.
• Corporate travel cards are used for authorized business travel and businessrelated expenses.
• The government’s vendors of record for travel-related services are used
whenever possible.
3.0 REQUIREMENTS – GENERAL
Requirements:
• Alcohol cannot be claimed and will not be reimbursed as part of a travel or meal
expense.
• Expenses for a group can only be claimed by the most senior person present. An
individual cannot claim for expenses incurred by their approver (e.g., a director
cannot submit their Assistant Deputy Minister’s (ADM) claim for lunch even if
they were at the same event).
• Good record-keeping practices must be maintained for verification and audit
purposes.
Claimants must:
• obtain all appropriate approvals before incurring expenses; if no prior approval
was obtained, then a documented explanation must be submitted with the claim.
• submit itemized receipts with all claims, except for meal expenses where meal
allowances are used (see Section 6.0); credit card slips are insufficient.
• In the absence of an itemized receipt, a documented explanation of why the
receipt is unavailable and a description itemizing and confirming the expenses
must be provided.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 6/38
• submit claims by the end of the quarter following the quarter in which the
expense was incurred; if the claim is not submitted within the timeframe, a
documented explanation is required.
• submit claims for expenses before leaving positions with a ministry or provincial
agency/organization.
Approvers must:
• provide approval only for expenses that were necessarily incurred in the
performance of ministry or provincial agency/organization business.
• provide approval only for claims that include all appropriate documentation (e.g.,
itemized receipts).
• not approve their own expenses.
Note that an overpayment to a claimant is considered to be a debt owing to the
government and must be repaid.
4.0 ACCOUNTABILITY FRAMEWORK
This Directive sets out the approval authority for incurring travel, meal and hospitality
expenses. Approval authority for the reimbursement of expenses is based on the
delegation of financial authority established for ministries and provincial
agencies/organizations.
In some cases, the level of approval to incur a travel, meal or hospitality expense is
identified and also whether the authority can be delegated. In other cases, a
requirement is stated (e.g., prior approval is required) without identifying an approval
level. Where no approval level is identified, ministries and provincial
agencies/organizations have the flexibility and discretion to establish their own level and
to address possible delegation.
A deputy minister or CEO has the authority to establish additional rules regarding
expenses. Any additional rules must be consistent with those laid out in this Directive
and be necessary to meet specific operational needs. These rules do not replace any
rules in this Directive, nor can they substitute higher rates of reimbursement for
kilometres or meals. Additional rules must include the date of approval and must be
accessible to everyone covered by the rules.
In addition, a deputy minister or CEO may modify the level of approval upward to a
more senior level when authority is assigned to a manager/supervisor or contract
manager.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 7/38
4.1 Managerial Discretion
For the purpose of this Directive, managerial discretion is the administrative authority to
make decisions and choices with some degree of flexibility, while maintaining
compliance with this Directive. There is no discretion to depart from the principles and
requirements of this Directive.
All decisions should be taken very carefully. When exercising discretion, the rationale
must be documented and filed with the claim.
Approvers are accountable for their decisions, which must be:
• based on good judgment and knowledge of the situation;
• exercised in appropriate circumstances; and
• compliant with the principles and requirements set out in this Directive.
For additional explanation on the exercise of managerial discretion, see the tip sheet on
this topic.
When a situation arises, and discretion needs to be exercised, approvers should
consider whether the request is:
• able to stand up to scrutiny by the auditors and members of the public;
• properly explained and documented;
• fair and equitable;
• reasonable; and
• appropriate
It is the responsibility of both the approver and the claimant to work out appropriate
arrangements which would meet the test of being fair and equitable.
Exemption
Only Treasury Board/Management Board of Cabinet (TB/MBC) can grant an exemption
from all or part of this Directive. Ministries can apply for an exemption by bringing
forward a business case to TB/MBC.
4.2 Public Disclosure of Expenses
Information about expenses must be posted on the appropriate public websites for the
following:
• Ministries – senior management:
o Deputy Ministers
o Associate Deputy Ministers
o Assistant Deputy Ministers
o Positions that carry the same degree of responsibility as those above
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 8/38
• Provincial agencies/organizations:
o Appointees (every person appointed to the provincial agency/organization
by the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the Lieutenant Governor or a
minister)
o CEOs (the most senior executive position, regardless of the title)
o Every member of senior management that reports directly to the CEO
The website for public disclosure of expense information for senior managers in
ministries is on Ontario.ca. Provincial agencies/organizations can use their own
websites for public disclosure.
Information about the procedures for posting on the public websites is found in the
public disclosure support material. It includes information on:
• the types of expenses to be disclosed;
• the details of each expense to be disclosed; and
• the frequency of posting.
5.0 TRAVEL
This Directive applies whenever travel is required. For the purpose of this Directive,
travel does not refer to a person’s regular commute to work – expenses related to a
person’s regular commute are not reimbursable.
5.1 When Travel is a Regular Part of the Job
There are some jobs where frequent travel is a requirement – part of the regular job
duties.
On hiring, managers should ensure that staff are aware of the Directive and how it will
affect the job. In these situations, approvers should meet with the employee to
determine appropriate strategies (e.g. pre-approval for frequent or regular travel, when
meals can be reimbursed, use of vehicles, etc.).
Ministries and provincial agencies/organizations with jobs that require regular travel
need to ensure that the Directive is utilized in a consistent manner so that managers
and employees have a common understanding of how the Directive is applied.
5.2 When Travel Occurs Occasionally
In the majority of positions in government, travel occurs irregularly on an as-needed
basis; for example, to attend training, meetings, conferences or consultations;
representing the government at an event; etc. In some cases, employees will be asked
by managers to travel, and in others, the request may come from the employee.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 9/38
5.3 Approvals for Travel
The following charts identify the approval levels for travel1
for everyone covered by this
Directive. In many cases, the authority for approval may be delegated. See below
(section 5.4) for information on delegation of authority.
Chart 1: Ministries
Chart 2: Provincial agencies whose employees are appointed under section 32 of
the PSOA (Commission public bodies)
Chart 3: Other provincial agencies/organizations whose employees are not
appointed under section 32 of the PSOA (includes the Independent
Electricity System Operator and Ontario Power Generation Inc.)
Special Status for International Travel
For some provincial agencies/organizations, the requirement to travel internationally
may be considered integral to their business. To ensure that the approvals process
does not have an undue negative effect on the ability of the provincial
agency/organization to conduct business, these provincial agencies/organizations may
have the opportunity to request special status that would allow the chair to approve
international travel instead of the positions listed in Chart 2 or 3.
Only TB/MBC can approve special status. Ministries can apply for special status on
behalf of their provincial agencies by bringing forward a business case to TB/MBC. If
TB/MBC approves special status, the chair may approve international travel or delegate
approval authority to the CEO. A provincial agency/organization with special status must
report regularly to their ministry, see Appendix A for reporting requirements.
Special status is approved for three years only. If special status continues to be required
by the provincial agency/organization, the ministry must reapply to TB/MBC.
Should the business of a provincial agency/organization with special status change
significantly during the three years, the ministry must reapply to TB/MBC for special
status on behalf of the provincial agency/organization, if appropriate.
For more information on this process and for the approval levels within provincial
agencies/ organizations once special status is granted, see Appendix A.

1
 These are the levels for approving travel, not for approving any expenses related to travel. Approval of expenses
rests with the individuals in organizations that have financial approval authority (through the financial delegation of
authority for OPS employees, or applicable mechanism in other organizations.)
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 10/38
Approval for Travel Plans
Chart 1
Level of Approval Required in Ministries
Role Within Ontario
2
Outside Ontario,
within Canada and
the USA
International – Outside
Canada and the USA
Deputy
Minister
N/A
3 Secretary, TB/MBC Secretary of the Cabinet
Employee Manager/Supervisor4 Secretary, TB/MBC Secretary of the Cabinet
Consultant Contract Manager Secretary, TB/MBC Secretary of the Cabinet
Chart 2
Level of Approval Required in Provincial Agencies whose Employees are Appointed
under section 32 of the PSOA – Commission public bodies
Role Within Ontario
2
Outside Ontario,
within Canada and
the USA
International – Outside
Canada and the USA
Chair N/A
3 N/A
3 Minister
Appointee Chair Chair Minister
CEO N/A
3 N/A
3 Secretary of the Cabinet
Employee Manager/Supervisor4 CEO Secretary of the Cabinet
Consultant Contract Manager CEO Secretary of the Cabinet
Chart 3
Level of Approval Required in Provincial Agencies/Organizations whose Employees
are Not Appointed under section 32 of the PSOA
Role Within Ontario
2
Outside Ontario,
within Canada and
the USA
International – Outside
Canada and the USA
Chair N/A
3 N/A
3 Minister
Appointee Chair Chair Minister
CEO N/A
3 N/A
3 Minister
Employee Manager/Supervisor4 CEO Minister
Consultant Contract Manager CEO Minister

2 Travel within Ontario includes travelling:
• to the National Capital Region (Ottawa/Gatineau); and
• outside the province when it provides a more economical route between provincial destinations.
3 Given the level of responsibility, no approvals are required.
4 According to the ministry’s or provincial agency/organization’s delegation of authority.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 11/38
5.4 Delegation of Authority for Travel Approvals
The following chart provides direction on when and how the authority for approving
travel requests can be delegated. If delegated, documentation and regular reporting to
the position with approval authority is required.
Position
with
approval
authority
Can authority be delegated? Requirements if
delegated
Minister
yes, but not for Chairs and Appointees
for others, limited to deputy ministers, no
further delegation
subject to limitations/
requirements identified by
the Minister
Secretary of
the Cabinet
yes, but not for direct reports
for others, delegation limited to:
a deputy minister for their ministry and the
Commission public bodies that report to
the ministry, no further delegation
and/or
the Secretary of TB/MBC for some or all
ministries and Commission public bodies,
no further delegation
subject to limitations/
requirements identified by
the Secretary of the
Cabinet
Secretary,
TB/MBC
yes, but not for direct reports
for others, delegation limited to the deputy
minister for their ministry, no further
delegation
subject to limitations/
requirements identified by
the Secretary, TB/MBC
Chair
no
intention is that the authority be exercised
at this level
n/a
Chief
Executive
Officer
(CEO)
yes, but not for direct reports
for others, delegation limited to the CFO
or equivalent level, no further delegation
subject to limitations/
requirements identified by
the CEO
5.5 Before Travelling
• Where required, obtain prior documented approval for travel and use the
appropriate forms. As a best practice, obtain prior documented approval for any
travel. Note that prior approval is required even in situations where expenses are
covered by a third party.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 12/38
• Whenever possible, use the government’s designated vendor of record service
providers. OPS employees can access these and online booking tools through
the Travel Gateway website.
• If there is a change in your itinerary, you should:
o report any changes to your approver as soon as possible; and
o submit any changes through the travel management company or, if
appropriate, an alternate travel agency.
• If you are eligible to use the corporate travel card, use it wherever possible to pay
for your travel expenses.
o If you are a ministry employee, information about the rules and
applications for the corporate travel card can be found at the Travel Card
Services website.
o Others should check with their provincial agency/organization the
availability of a corporate travel card.
• Secure travel documents, immunizations, and medications, as appropriate before
you travel.
• Inform your approver of any arrangements (e.g., accessibility, health, etc.)
required during travel.
• Participation in frequent flyer or other loyalty programs is permitted provided that
you:
o choose the most cost-effective accommodation or method of travel;
o use the corporate travel management company to book your method of
travel; and
o use the corporate travel card to pay for all travel expenses.
• Loyalty points can be redeemed at the user’s discretion; however, they cannot be
redeemed for cash by using the points for business purposes and then
submitting a claim for reimbursement.
Travelling Outside Canada
If travelling outside Canada, in addition to the obligations set out elsewhere in this
Directive, the following rules apply.
Requests for travel outside Canada must include:
• prior documented approval; ministry and Commission public body employees
must complete the appropriate form;
o Request for Approval for Travel within Canada and the USA form; or
o Request for Approval for International Travel form.
• acknowledgement that all appropriate approvals are in place;
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 13/38
• documented rationale demonstrating critical value of travel for government/
organizational priorities and interests, and how the travel will produce a benefit
for the province;
• documentation showing detailed itemization of anticipated expenses (note that
the lowest cost and most reasonable method of travel must be used); and
• confirmation that a security assessment for physical and cyber risk has been
completed for the proposed travel destination.
When planning any travel, consider business continuity (e.g., deciding whether senior
management or people with specialized knowledge or expertise should travel together).
Security Assessment
When travelling outside Canada, including the USA, a prior assessment of physical and
cyber security is required. The assessment provides recommendations on safeguards
against cyber and physical security threats for individuals travelling internationally.
Information on the requirement for the security assessment is included in the travel
forms (Request for Approval for International Travel form and Request for Travel
Outside Ontario – Within Canada and the USA form). Provincial agencies/organizations
that do not use the travel forms can contact TravelSecure@ontario.ca for information.
Insurance
OPS employees can find information on insurance on Travel Gateway. Others should
check with their provincial agency/organization for direction on insurance.
Medical and Health Insurance
Eligible OPS employees5 are covered under the employer’s health insurance plans in
the event of illness or injury. The cost of additional private medical and health insurance
will not be reimbursed for travel within Canada.
Other provincial agency/organization employees, appointees and consultants should
speak to their ministry or provincial agency/organization to assess their coverage for
medical and health insurance within Canada.
You are responsible for arranging appropriate out-of-country medical insurance. For
ministry employees, this cost is reimbursable and can be charged on the corporate
travel card.
When purchasing out-of-country medical insurance, it is advised that you also purchase
the option that allows for immediate payment of costs at the time of the incident (i.e., upfront payment option).

5 For information about eligibility for medical, health and travel accident insurance coverage, see the Pay and
Benefits website and relevant collective agreement, as appropriate.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 14/38
Provincial agency/organization employees, appointees and consultants should speak to
their ministry or provincial agency/organization about reimbursement for out-of-country
insurance.
Travel Accident Insurance
Eligible OPS employees have basic insurance for accidental injury or accidental death.
Extra insurance may be arranged at the traveller’s expense – it will not be reimbursed.
Other provincial agency/organization employees, appointees and consultants should
speak with their ministry or provincial agency/organization to assess their coverage for
travel accident insurance.
Vehicle Insurance
Rental Vehicles
For Ministries:
• If you have a corporate travel card you must use it to rent a vehicle and you
should decline the collision damage waiver offered by the rental company. The
benefits of the corporate travel card include insurance that covers the cost of
repairing damage to approved vehicle types rented using the travel card.
• If you do not have a corporate travel card, or you rent a vehicle that is not eligible
for coverage under the card, you should purchase the collision damage waiver
coverage offered by the rental company. The insurance costs can be claimed as
a travel expense. For more information, go to Travel Card Services website.
For Provincial Agencies/Organizations:
• Provincial agencies/organizations should check the coverage on any corporate
travel cards.
Personal Vehicle
If you use your personal vehicle while on government business, the following applies.
• The vehicle must be insured at the vehicle owner’s expense for personal motor
vehicle liability.
• It is the driver/owner’s responsibility to ensure that the motor vehicle insurance
includes coverage for business use of the vehicle.
• The government will not reimburse the costs of insurance coverage for business
use, physical damage or liability.
• The government is not responsible for reimbursing deductible amounts related to
insurance coverage.
• In the event of an accident, you will not be permitted to make a claim to the
government for any resulting damages.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 15/38
5.6 Transportation – How to Get There
Ministry employees should make travel reservations through the government’s travel
management company or book online through the Travel Gateway website.
• Use the government’s travel management company, when booking airfare or
making multiple travel arrangements in combination with airfare.
• Use the online booking tools for travel arrangements other than airfare (e.g., rail,
hotel, rental car).
Provincial agency/organization employees and appointees may call the government’s
travel management company directly. Where a provincial agency/organization has an
established relationship with an alternative travel agency, it may make reservations with
that travel agency as appropriate.
Air Travel
Air travel is permitted when it is the most practical and economical way to travel.
Choose the lowest fare available when purchasing a ticket. Travel in business class
must have prior approval by the deputy minister or CEO, in limited circumstances such
as:
• on international flights; and
• on flights within Canada and the USA if related to the provision of reasonable
accommodation (e.g., health reasons).
In some cases, ministry employees may need to use government-owned and charter
aircraft. This is managed through the Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry.
Rail Travel
Rail travel is permitted when it is the most practical and economical way to travel.
Choose the lowest fare available when purchasing a ticket. Travel in business class
must have prior approval by the deputy minister or CEO in limited circumstances such
as:
• the need to work with a team;
• choosing a travel time that allows you to reduce expenditures on meals or
accommodation;
• accommodation requirements; and
• health and safety considerations.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 16/38
Road Travel
Choosing the Appropriate Vehicle
When driving is the most practical, economical way to travel, the following choices are
available:
• government vehicle;
• rental vehicle; or
• personal vehicle.
The use of any vehicle must be discussed in advance with your approver. Provide and
document the rationale for using a particular type of vehicle. The most practical and
economical option should be selected.
If you travel regularly as part of your job, arrangements for travelling and the choice of
vehicle should be made when you are hired.
Government Vehicle
Government vehicles may be available for use in ministries that have a fleet program.
Employees should follow the rules approved by their ministry.
Government vehicles can only be used for government business. You can have a
passenger in a government vehicle only if the passenger’s travel is related to
government business.
Provincial agency/organization employees, appointees and consultants should follow
the rules approved by the provincial agency/organization.
Rental Vehicle
When renting a vehicle, choose the lowest cost model. Any exceptions must be:
• documented and approved prior to the rental if possible; and
• guided by the principle that the rental vehicle is the most economical and
practical size, considering the business purpose, number of occupants, safety
(including weather) considerations and any reasonable accommodation
requirements.
Luxury and premium vehicles are not permitted.
To avoid higher gasoline charges, refuel your rental car before returning it.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 17/38
Ministry employees must follow the rules below.
• Use the federal rental car directory to find appropriate companies.
• To ensure that the government, as employer, provides liability coverage when
you are renting a vehicle in the province on Ontario government business, you
must:
o name the renter as Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Ontario,
o add the name of your ministry, and
o list yourself and any other drivers on the rental contract.
• When renting a car in Ontario, use a letter confirming “Her Majesty the Queen in
right of Ontario” as the renter. This letter is available on the Travel Gateway
website.
Provincial agency/organization employees, appointees and consultants should follow
the rules for renting vehicles approved by the provincial agency/organization.
Car-sharing, through the government’s vendor of record, can be used if a vehicle is
needed for a short duration (e.g. approximately six hours or less) if:
• Car-sharing is available in your area; and
• It is the most practical and economical way to travel.
Personal Vehicle
Using a personal vehicle must be discussed in advance with your approver. The
ministry or provincial agency/organization assumes no financial responsibility for
personal vehicles.
Employees who have the approval to use a personal vehicle will be reimbursed
according to the kilometric reimbursement rates. Employees must keep daily logs of the
kilometers used to track the business use.
Accident Reporting
All accidents must be reported immediately to local law enforcement authorities and
your immediate supervisor. In addition:
• If you are using a government vehicle, advise the ministry’s fleet coordinator and
the fleet management vendor of record as well.
• If you are using a rental vehicle, advise the rental car agency and contact the
travel card insurance provider to initiate a claim.
• If you are using a personal vehicle, advise your own insurer.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 18/38
Reimbursement Rates
Rates are based on kilometres accumulated from April 1 of each fiscal year. Rates may
be established in a collective agreement. If they are not, the rates in this Directive apply.
Expense claims must be submitted with distances calculated in kilometres.
For claimants who can use IFIS/iExpenses, the appropriate rate for reimbursement by
kilometre is applied automatically when a claim is submitted electronically through
IFIS/iExpenses.
All others should follow their ministry’s or provincial agency/organization’s procedure for
claiming kilometre reimbursement.
Total Kilometres Driven
per fiscal year
Southern Ontario
($ per km)
Northern Ontario
($ per km)
0 – 4000 km 0.40 0.41
4001 – 10, 700 km 0.35 0.36
10, 701 – 24, 000 km 0.29 0.30
More than 24, 000 km 0.24 0.25
Accumulated kilometres must be transferred with a claimant when moving within
government to another job, ministry or provincial agency/organization.
Reimbursement rates for personal vehicles driven outside Ontario will be at the rates for
southern Ontario.
A description of the boundary between northern and southern Ontario can be found in
the Q&As document.
Parking and Tolls
Reimbursement is provided for necessary and reasonable parking expenses, as well as
tolls for bridges, ferries and highways, when driving on government business. Parking
costs incurred in the office area as part of a regular commute to work will not be
reimbursed. There is no reimbursement for traffic or parking violations.
Taxis and Ride-hailing Services
Prior approval to use a taxi or ride-hailing service should be obtained whenever
possible. Taxis and ride-hailing services may be justified in cases where:
• group travel is more economical than the total cost of having individuals travel
separately by public transit or shuttle; or
• there is an unusually tight schedule for meetings.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 19/38
Taxis and ride-hailing services may not be used to commute to work or home except
under exceptional circumstances; for example:
• weather, health or safety conditions indicate it is the best, appropriate option; or
• transport of work-related baggage or parcels is required.
Ride-hailing services can only be used and reimbursed under the following conditions:
• in municipalities where ride-hailing services are regulated and appropriately
insured; and
• where a standard (i.e. non-premium and single occupancy) service is used.
Use your corporate travel card to pay for any ride-hailing expenses, whenever possible.
Gratuities for taxis and ride-hailing services must be reasonable.
Public Transit
Local public transportation including hotel/airport shuttles should be used wherever
possible. Program areas should consider purchasing a transit pass or passes, where
available and appropriate, for use by employees on work business.
5.7 Accommodation
In the normal conduct of business, reimbursement for overnight accommodation within
your office area will be neither authorized nor approved. However, in emergency or
highly unusual situations exceptions will be considered. For example:
• You are required to remain close to your office for periods long in excess of
(your) standard working hours.
• Your services are deemed necessary (and approved accordingly) for the
purposes of emergency or crisis management.
Reimbursement for hotel suites, executive floors or concierge levels is not permitted.
Reimbursement will be made for single accommodation in a standard room. To lower
the costs of accommodation, consideration should be given to aaccommodation outside
of downtown areas. Often, it is more economical and accessible by public transit and
other cost-effective means of transportation.
For extended stays at a single location, accommodation must be arranged with prior
approval. This will take advantage of lower weekly or monthly rates.
Penalties incurred for non-cancellation of guaranteed hotel reservations are the
claimant’s responsibility and may be reimbursed only in an exceptional circumstance.
Use the federal online accommodation directory which provides information on service
providers offering government rates. If you do not have access to the directory, use the
rules in your workplace.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 20/38
Private stays with friends or family are acceptable, and a cash payment or gift may be
provided to the friends or family:
• A maximum of $30 per night is allowed for accommodation including any meals
with friends or family, in lieu of commercial accommodation. Instead of a receipt,
you must submit a documented explanation describing the purpose of the trip,
identifying the host and the number of days you stayed.
• The $30 value may be given in the form of a small gift (which must be
accompanied by a receipt) or by cash or cheque.
5.8 Incidental Expenses
Incidental expenses are those types of expenses that are sometimes a necessary part
of travel. Some common types of incidental expenses are set out below. Necessary and
reasonable incidental expenses that are not specified below may be claimed and
reimbursed if you anticipate these expenses and obtain prior approval. Incidental
expenses for which prior approval was not obtained require deputy minister/CEO
approval. Approval is subject to managerial discretion.
Visas and Immunization
You may be reimbursed for the cost of a visa and/or the cost of immunizations and
medications if necessary for international travel.
Laundry and Dry Cleaning
If travelling on business for five consecutive days or more, reimbursement for laundry
and dry cleaning is allowed within reasonable limits. Itemized receipts are required.
You will not be reimbursed for personal or recreational items including toothbrushes,
pay-per-view, items from the mini-bar, or hotel valet services.
Communication
With prior approval, you may use your government cell/mobile phone for business
purposes when travelling. Speak with your approver to determine what is covered in
your cell/mobile phone plan and how your ministry or provincial agency/organization
wishes to handle long distance or roaming charges. Note that any use of a mobile
phone is subject to a security assessment if travelling outside of Canada (see Section
5.5 above).
Wherever possible, you are expected to use the least expensive means of
communication, such as:
• internet enabled calling cards; and
• internet access through the local provincial government network.
Use alternatives to travel whenever possible (e.g., audio or video conferencing).
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 21/38
If you are away on government business, reimbursement may be made for:
• reasonable and necessary personal calls home; and
• additional business expenses, such as:
o reasonable and necessary business calls
o emergency calls
o internet connections and computer access charges
o word processing, faxing, photocopying, and scanning services
o rental and transportation of necessary office equipment
Dependent Care
For the purposes of this Directive, a dependent is a person who resides with the
traveller on a full-time basis and relies on the traveller for care (e.g., a child or parent).
Prior approval for reimbursement of dependent care expenses is required, as well as a
documented explanation of the circumstances. If travel is an expected part of your job
duties, there is no reimbursement for dependent care expenses. However, expenses
may be reimbursed if the travel requirements of your job or personal circumstances
change unexpectedly.
Requests for dependent care expenses may be reimbursed under the following
circumstances:
• if travel is occasional or unexpected; and
• if you incur expenses above and beyond your usual costs for dependent care as
a direct result of travel.
In these situations, you may be reimbursed for your actual costs up to a daily maximum:
• $75/day/dependent, if you have a caregiver’s receipt.
• $35/day/dependent, if you provide a documented explanation.
6.0 MEALS
6.1 Reimbursable Meals
Reasonable and appropriate meal expenses may be reimbursed. You may incur a meal
expense when you are on government business and you:
• are away from the office area (i.e., at least 24 km) over a normal meal period; or
• have prior approval for the expense (e.g., a business meeting within the office
area that must occur over lunch).
Meal expenses will be reimbursed at the established meal allowance rates, regardless
of the actual meal costs. A meal allowance rate recognizes that sometimes a meal may
be less than the allowance rate, and sometimes more; regardless, the allowance rate is
reimbursed. Taxes and gratuities are included in the meal allowance rates. Receipts are 
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 22/38
not required to be submitted or retained. Meals must be purchased in order to be able to
submit a claim for reimbursement. Alcohol cannot be claimed and will not be
reimbursed.
In very limited and exceptional circumstances (e.g. health or dietary considerations;
limited options available) where a meal expense is higher than the meal allowance rate,
the actual cost of the meal may be reimbursed. Where these circumstances are
anticipated, prior approval is required. Where these circumstances have not been
anticipated and prior approval has not been obtained, deputy minister or CEO approval
for reimbursement of the expense is required. In any situation where there is a claim for
a meal expense higher than the allowance, the claim must be accompanied by an
itemized receipt and a documented rationale for exceeding the rate. A credit card slip is
not sufficient. Approval is subject to managerial discretion.
There may be situations where an individual pays the meal expenses for a group of
individuals. In such cases, the individual may be reimbursed for the total of all meals
purchased at the allowance rate for that meal. Group meal expenses can be claimed
only:
• by the most senior person present – expenses cannot be claimed by an
individual that are incurred by their approver; and
• for individuals covered by this Directive.
The meal allowance rate is for food eaten in a restaurant or for the purchase of
prepared food only. Reimbursement for groceries must have prior approval. A receipt
and a documented rationale including a breakdown of the actual groceries used for the
meals being claimed must be submitted with the claim.
Reimbursement will not be provided for meals consumed at home or included in the
cost of transportation, accommodation, seminars or conferences. If you travel as a
regular part of your job, your meals will not normally be reimbursed unless you have
obtained prior approval.
6.2 Centrally Purchased Meals (Catered)
For meals that are centrally purchased (e.g. catering for a working meeting), the
maximum amount spent per person should not exceed the established meal allowance
rate. As with all corporate purchase card transactions, receipts and appropriate
approvals are required.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 23/38
6.3 Meal Rates in Canada
Reimbursement for meal expenses incurred in Canada is subject to the meal allowance
rates set out in the chart below. The rates include taxes and gratuities.
Meal Type Meal Allowance Rate
Breakfast $10.00
Lunch $12.50
Dinner $22.50
These rates should also be used as the maximum amount per person for any centrally
purchased meals.
6.4 Meal Rates Outside of Canada
Federal meal allowance rates are used for meal expenses incurred outside Canada as
set out in the appendices of the National Joint Council Travel Directive or successor
directive. The rates include taxes and gratuities.
The two relevant appendices are:
• Appendix C - Allowances - Module 2
6
• Appendix D - Allowances - Module 47
The following chart sets out when and how to use the appendices.
Travel to
Meal
Allowance
Rates found in
Application for this Directive
USA Appendix C Rates are the same as the federal rates for
Canada, but in US funds.
Rates include taxes and gratuities.
Rates do not include incidental expenses.
International
(outside Canada
and the USA)
Appendix D Rates are in the funds identified for each
country.
Rates are dependent on the city rates.
Rates include taxes and gratuities.
Rates do not include incidental expenses.

6 Modules 1, 2 and 3 are differentiations for federal use only.
7 Module 4 refers to international travel (outside Canada and the USA).
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 24/38
7.0 HOSPITALITY
Hospitality is the provision of food, beverage, accommodation, transportation and other
amenities at public expense to people who are not engaged in work for:
• any entity covered by this Directive; and
• any organization covered by the Broader Public Sector Expenses Directive.
Hospitality cannot be offered solely for the benefit of anyone covered by this Directive or
the Broader Public Sector Expenses Directive. This means that reimbursement or
payment of expenses related to office social events (e.g., retirement parties, holiday
lunches, etc.) are not permitted.
Hospitality may include hosting or sponsoring planned events, and business interactions
(e.g., networking meals).
Hospitality may be extended in an economical and consistent manner on behalf of the
government under the following circumstances.
• When hospitality facilitates government business, including:
o engaging in discussion of official public matters with, or sponsoring formal
conferences for:
▪ representatives from other governments;
▪ business and industry;
▪ public interest groups; or
▪ labour groups.
• When the business of a provincial agency/organization includes hospitality
• When hospitality is considered desirable as a matter of courtesy or protocol,
including:
o providing people from national, international, or charitable organizations
with an understanding or appreciation of Ontario and the workings of its
government
o honouring people for exceptional public service in Ontario
o conducting ceremonies for heads of state, government or guests from the
private sector
• Other hospitality as approved by the deputy minister or CEO, providing it
conforms to the rules set out in this section of the Directive.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 25/38
7.1 Planned Hospitality Events
A government facility should be used if available and appropriate. If not, prior approval
from the deputy minister or CEO is required.
Costs should be minimized where possible with due regard for the guests’ status, the
size of the party, and the intended business purpose.
• The host extending the invitation:
o must document and justify the list of government representatives;
o keep the number of government representatives to a minimum, limiting it
to those who have a direct involvement in the purpose of the event; and
o may include the partner of a host or government representative only when
required by protocol, and may reimburse their expenses, as a guest of
government hospitality with the following provisions:
▪ may be paid only on authorization by the deputy minister or
provincial agency/organization CEO
▪ may include costs for travel, event tickets or tours and
▪ must be paid directly to the partner.
7.2 Hospitality that Includes Alcohol
Hospitality may include the provision of alcohol:
• at a planned hospitality event; or
• at a business interaction (e.g. networking dinner).
Ministries and hydro organizations are not permitted to incur expenses for alcohol.
Reimbursement or payment of alcohol is only permitted for provincial agencies if it is
considered to be integral to their business.
The following is required prior to serving alcohol at a planned hospitality event:
• Prior documentation with approval from the deputy minister; ministers have no
authority to approve (see also special status below for more information);
• Completed form on hospitality with the service of alcohol.
Reimbursement of alcohol expenses is allowed only when the appropriate approvals are
in place. Alcohol must be provided in a responsible manner (e.g., food must be served
when alcohol is provided). Preference should be given to wine, beer and spirits
produced in Ontario.
7.3 Special Status for Service of Alcohol at Planned Hospitality Events
To ensure that the approvals process does not have an undue negative effect on the
ability of the agency to conduct business, ministries may request special status on
behalf of provincial agencies. Special status would allow the chair to approve the
service of alcohol at planned hospitality events instead of the deputy minister. 
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 26/38
Only Treasury Board/Management Board of Cabinet (TB/MBC) can approve special
status. Ministries can apply for special status on behalf of their provincial agency by
bringing forward a business case to TB/MBC. If TB/MBC approves special status, the
chair may approve the service of alcohol at planned hospitality events or delegate
approval authority to the CEO. A provincial agency with special status must report
regularly to their ministry; see Appendix A for reporting requirements.
Special status is approved for three years. If special status continues to be required by
the provincial agency, the ministry must reapply to TB/MBC on behalf of the provincial
agency. Should the business of a provincial agency with special status change
significantly during the three years, the ministry must reapply to TB/MBC for special
status, if appropriate.
For more information on this process and for the approval levels within agencies once
special status is granted, see Appendix A.
7.4 Gift-Giving
Appropriate token gifts of appreciation, valued up to $30, may be offered in exchange
for gifts of service or expertise to people who are not engaged in work for the
government of Ontario, or with any organization covered by the Broader Public Sector
Expenses Directive. Gifts valued over $30 must have prior approval.
7.5 Documentation for Hospitality Reimbursement and Payment
Hospitality expenses for planned events should be paid using a corporate purchase
card, if possible. Hospitality expenses for business interactions should be paid using a
corporate travel card, if possible, and reimbursed to the claimant.
All expenses must be documented and include itemized receipts. The claim must
include hospitality details regarding:
• purpose;
• date(s);
• location;
• hospitality provided;
• attendees
o Ontario government attendees (those covered by this Directive) listed by
name and position.
o Broader Public Sector organization attendees (those covered by the
Broader Public Sector Expenses Directive) listed by name and position.
o other attendees listed by name and organization.
• appropriate prior approvals. 
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 27/38
8.0 EXPENSES FOR CONSULTANTS AND OTHER CONTRACTORS
Consultants and other contractors will not be reimbursed for any hospitality, incidental
or food expenses, including:
• Meals, snacks and beverages
• Laundry or dry cleaning
• Dependent care
• Personal communications
Reimbursement for allowable expenses under this Directive can be claimed only when
the contract with the government or provincial agency/organization specifically allows
for it.
9.0 RESPONSIBILITIES
Employees and appointees are responsible for:
• following the principles and rules set out in this Directive.
• being aware of the conflict of interest rules that govern their ministry or provincial
agency/organization.
• being aware of any relevant statutes, directives, policies and guidelines.
Supervisors and managers are responsible for:
• carrying out any delegated authorities and assigned tasks in accordance with this
Directive.
• exercising managerial discretion judiciously.
• ensuring there is an appropriate records retention system and that documents,
including claims and approvals, are maintained and stored.
• ensuring staff are aware of the requirements of this Directive.
• seeking timely direction when there are questions of application.
• taking appropriate action in the case of non-compliance.
Deputy ministers and CEOs/chairs are responsible for:
• ensuring the Directive’s principles, requirements and best practices are
implemented and monitored, including putting in place processes that support the
Directive.
• delegating approval authority to appropriate levels within the ministry except as
restricted in this Directive.
• carrying out any delegated authorities and assigned tasks in accordance with this
Directive.
• ensuring consistent application of the Directive (e.g. for all jobs requiring regular
travel).
• ensuring that claims are fully documented by running regular spot checks.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 28/38
• ensuring that all persons covered by this Directive are aware of their
responsibilities under this Directive and of the appropriate conflict of interest
rules.
• approving the service of alcohol at hospitality events in provincial agencies that
do not have special status for that purpose granted by TB/MBC (deputy ministers
only).
Chairs are responsible for:
• ensuring all employees and appointees are made aware of their responsibilities
under this Directive.
• ensuring the Directive is applied and monitored appropriately.
• ensuring that staff with delegated authority are able to effectively apply this
Directive.
Ministers are responsible for:
• approving international travel plans by persons in provincial
agencies/organizations, as appropriate, that do not have special status for that
purpose granted by TB/MBC.
• delegating approval authority to deputy ministers as set out in the Directive.
Deputy Minister, Treasury Board Secretariat is responsible for:
• Interpreting this Directive and providing advice, guidance, educational materials
and information.
• maintaining and enforcing controllership standards and guidelines for corporate
travel card for use by OPS employees.
Deputy Minister, Government and Consumer Services is responsible for:
• establishing and managing corporate contracts for travel services including
ticketed transportation, accommodation and vehicle rental.
• overseeing the insurance and risk management function of the government.
• negotiating and managing the services agreement for the corporate travel card.
Secretary, Treasury Board/Management Board of Cabinet is responsible for:
• approving plans for travel in Canada and the USA by persons in ministries and
deputy ministers.
• delegating approval authority to appropriate levels within the ministry, but not for
direct reports.
• specifying any reporting requirements, monitoring the application of the Directive
and recommending improvements.
• reviewing the reimbursement/allowance rates in this Directive every two years to
identify possible adjustments or amendments.
• reviewing this Directive on a regular basis.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 29/38
• designating the senior managers in ministries required to disclose their expense
information on the public website.
• carrying out any delegated authorities and assigned tasks in accordance with this
Directive.
Secretary of the Cabinet is responsible for:
• approving the travel plans and expenses of deputy ministers as set out in this
Directive.
• delegating authority for approval of deputy ministers’ expense to the Secretary of
TB/MBC.
• approving international travel by persons in ministries and deputy ministers.
• approving international travel by persons in Commission public bodies, as
appropriate, that do not have special status for that purpose granted by TB/MBC.
• delegating approval authority to deputy ministers and to the Secretary of TB/MBC
as set out in this Directive.
• submitting their business expenses for items covered in this Directive to the
Conflict of Interest Commissioner for approval.
Treasury Board/Management Board of Cabinet is responsible for:
• setting government policy on travel, accommodation, meals and hospitality
expenses.
• approving special status for international travel by persons in provincial
agencies/organizations based on a business case.
• approving special status for the service of alcohol at hospitality events in
provincial agencies based on a business case.
• granting exemptions from all or part of this Directive.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 30/38
10.0 DEFINITIONS
Appointee: A person appointed by the government to undertake any function on behalf
of the government.
Approver: A person with the authority to make approvals under this Directive.
Chair: Someone appointed as head of a provincial agency/organization, accountable to
the minister, regardless of whether the title “chair” is used.
Chief Executive Officer (CEO): The head of operations at provincial agencies and
organizations.
Claimant: Anyone making a claim under the terms of this Directive.
Commission public body: a provincial agency whose employees are appointed under
section 32 of the Public Service of Ontario Act, 2006 (PSOA) (Commission public
bodies are prescribed by regulation under PSOA).
Consultants and Contractors: Individuals or entities under contract to ministries or to
provincial agencies providing consulting or other services.
Delegation of Authority: A written assignment by which a person who has a power,
duty, function or responsibility under this Directive authorizes another person (identified
by name or by position title) to exercise the power, duty, function or responsibility.
Dependent: Someone who resides with the traveller on a full-time basis and relies on
the traveller for care (e.g., a child or parent).
Documented Approval: Agreement or consent from manager or above to incur an
expense, as outlined in this Directive, in a written or electronic format.
Employee:
OPS employee: Individual appointed as a public servant under section 32 of the
PSOA (includes employees in ministries and in provincial agencies that are
Commission public bodies).
Provincial agency/organization employee: Individual employed by a provincial
agency/organization that is not appointed under section 32 of the PSOA
(includes some provincial agencies and organizations (Independent Electricity
System Operator and Ontario Power Generation Inc.)).
Hospitality: The provision of food, beverage, accommodation, transportation and other
amenities at public expense to people who are not engaged in work for the government
of Ontario or for any organizations covered by the Broader Public Sector Expenses
Directive.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 31/38
Itemized receipt: Document identifying the vendor with the date and amount of each
expense item paid by the claimant. Document can be in an original paper, an original
electronic, or a scanned copy format.
Office area: The area surrounding the regular workplace, with a perimeter of 24km
measured by the most direct, safe and practical route by road.
Organizations: For the purposes of this Directive, the Independent Electricity System
Operator and Ontario Power Generation Inc.
Provincial agency: An entity that is part of the government of Ontario, but not
organizationally part of a ministry, and is subject to the Agencies and Appointments
Directive.
Travel management company: The Ontario government’s vendor of record for travel.
 
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 32/38
11.0 APPENDICES
11.1 Appendix A: Requesting Special Status for International Travel and/or
Service of Alcohol at Hospitality Events
Process for Obtaining Special Status
• Special status must be based on a provincial agency’s/organization’s
demonstrated, unique business need.
• The provincial agency/organization initiates contact with the responsible ministry
to request special status; and, with minister's approval, the ministry develops the
TB/MBC submission.
• The TB/MBC submission must include at minimum the following information:
o Special status being requested: approval for service of alcohol at
hospitality events and/or for international travel.
o Business case: demonstrates how the special status supports the
provincial agency’s/organization’s business plan and mandate.
o Forecast of activity:
▪ travel plan forecasting the international travel requirements; and/or
▪ listing of types of events where alcohol may be served.
o Commitment to report regularly on activity undertaken.
o Commitment to provide annual activity forecasts.
Regular reporting should include the following:
• Activity undertaken by the provincial agency/organization during the reporting
period, indicating whether the activity appeared on the forecast.
• If not forecasted, then an explanation of the occurrence of the activity.
Approval levels for provincial agencies/organizations with special status:
• Service of alcohol at hospitality events (for provincial agencies only)
o The chair has the approval authority for the service of alcohol at a
hospitality event.
o The chair may delegate to the CEO.
o Prior documented approval is required for each event.
• International travel (for provincial agencies/organizations)
o The chair has the approval authority for international travel by persons in
the provincial agency/organization, except for chair’s own travel.
o The chair may delegate approval authority to the CEO, except for
approvals for appointees and for any positions reporting directly to the
chair, including the CEO.
o Prior documented approval is required.
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 33/38
Role Approval Level Delegation of Authority
Chair Minister No delegation
Appointee Chair No delegation
CEO Chair No delegation
Employee Chair May delegate to the CEO
Consultant/Contractor Chair May delegate to the CEO
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 34/38
11.2 Appendix B: Summary of Approval Authority
The chart below summarizes the approval authorities for deputy ministers and above for
ministries and provincial agencies/organizations in the Travel, Meal and Hospitality
Expense Directive.
The Directive sets out the approval authority for incurring travel, meal and hospitality
expenses. Approval authority for the reimbursement of expenses is based on the
delegation of financial authority established for ministries and provincial
agencies/organizations.
In some cases, the level of approval to incur a travel, meal or hospitality expense is
identified and also whether the authority can be delegated. In other cases, a
requirement is stated (e.g., prior approval is required) without identifying an approval
level. Where no approval level is identified, ministries and provincial
agencies/organizations have the flexibility and discretion to establish their own level and
to address possible delegation.
Ministries
Provision Deputy
Minister
Secretary,
TB/MBC
Secretary of
the Cabinet
International travel (outside
Canada and the USA)
✓
Limited
delegation
permitted
Travel outside Ontario, within ✓
Canada and the USA Limited
delegation
permitted
Business class air and rail travel ✓
Incidental expenses not specified If prior approval
was not
obtained
✓
Meal over allowance rate If prior approval
was not
obtained
✓
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 35/38
Provision Deputy
Minister
Secretary,
TB/MBC
Secretary of
the Cabinet
Non-government facility for
planned hospitality event ✓
Expenses for partner of host/
government representative at a
planned hospitality event
✓
Provincial Agencies/Organizations
Provision Minister
Secretary
of the
Cabinet
Deputy
Minister CEO Chair
International travel for
provincial agencies that
are Commission public
bodies
- employees,
consultants, and
CEOs
✓
Limited
delegation
permitted
- chairs and
appointees ✓
International travel for
provincial agencies that
are not Commission
public bodies and for
organizations
✓
Limited
delegation
permitted
International travel if ✓
TB/MBC has approved
special status
Limited
delegation
permitted
Business class air and
rail travel ✓
Incidental expenses not
specified If prior
approval
was not
obtained
✓
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 36/38
Provision Minister
Secretary
of the
Cabinet
Deputy
Minister CEO Chair
Meal over allowance rate If prior
approval
was not
obtained
✓
Non-government facility
for planned hospitality
event ✓
Expenses for partner of
host/ government
representative at a
planned hospitality event
✓
Alcohol at a planned
hospitality event –
documented approval
prior to even
✓
Alcohol at a planned
hospitality event if
TB/MBC has approved
special status
✓
Limited
delegation
permitted
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 37/38
11.3 Appendix C: Revisions to the Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses
Directive
Date Revision Summary Page
January 1,
2020
Principles – separated principles and
practices and strengthened reference
alternative communications options
best
to use of
5
Public Disclosure –
disclosure from the
added direction on public
former Appendix D
7-8
Changes to special status provisions 9 and 26
Updated categories for travel approvals 10 and 11
Airplane and Train – removed industry specific
terms, identified the lowest fare available as the
standard, added option for flexibility for those
whose schedules frequently change
15 and 16
Vehicle – removed order of preference, adjusted
references to government fleet vehicles, added
direction on car-sharing VOR
16
Added rules on ride-hailing to taxi section 19
Added option to purchase a public transit pass or
passes
19
Updated Other Expenses to Incidental Expenses
and modified the common types of expenses
20 - 22
Meals – added requirement for Deputy Minister or
CEO approval for meal expenses higher than
allowance rate; added direction on centrally
purchased meals
22 and 23
Hospitality – updated scope of hospitality to
prohibit hospitality for organizations covered by
BPS Expenses Directive; updated rules on service
of alcohol
24 - 26
Enabling digital processes – changed language
from written to documented for approvals and
rationales, and removed requirement for receipts
to be original
Throughout
directive
Housekeeping: updated agencies to provincial
agencies, updated for plain language
Throughout
directive
Added an appendix summarizing provisions and
approval authorities.
35 - 37
Removed Appendix B – Travel Management
Company, Appendix C – Website Links, and
Appendix D – Public Disclosure of Expenses.
(Note: Added direction from Appendix D to pages
7-8)
n/a
January 1, 2020 Travel, Meal and Hospitality Expenses Directive 38/38
January 1,
2017
Application and scope section – updated to
remove dated reference to Public Sector
5
Expenses Review Act, 2009, provide specific
references to hydro organizations
Changes to the meal reimbursement method and 25 and 26
rates;
Clarified security assessment requirements for
international travel
14, 15
23
and
Public Disclosure of Expenses – removed
reference to Public Sector Expenses Review
2009
Act,
9 and 41
Housekeeping: change in terminology
classified agency to provincial agency
– from Throughout
directive
November 2014 Appendix D: Amendment to the
Hospitality Expenses Directive
Public Disclosure of Expenses
Travel, Meal and
41
April 1, 2010 Document restructured to conform to directive
format, and for better flow of information
n/a
Purpose expanded to provide direction for the
public disclosure of information about expenses
5
Application expanded to include
agencies/organizations identified under the Public
Sector Expenses Review Act, 2009
5
Accountability framework section clarifies approval
authorities, the delegation of authority, managerial
discretion and public disclosure of information
about expenses
8
Travel section includes clarification on ministry and
agency/organization approvals for travelling, and
clarifies rules for reimbursement of travel
10 and 11
expenses
Hospitality section includes clarification on ministry
and agency/ organization approvals for hospitality
including the service of alcohol
28
Consultants and contractors’ section set out clear 31
rules for reimbursement of expenses
Responsibilities section is enhanced
expanded
and 34
New appendices provide greater clarity 37